# qubit-note: Sensors 101

## Overview


## Sensors

Optical interrupt sensor (Figure 1.19 A): These detect light (infrared or visible) passing
through a gap between two posts, sensing when the beam is broken. When used with
notched wheels, like the one pictured, they can detect rotation and speed by counting
notches, making them encoders.

Ultrasonic distance sensor (Figure 1.19 B): The HC-SR04 is a distance/ranging sensor
that uses sound pulses, similar to the way bats navigate. It is affected by the types of
material an object is made from. It requires precise timing in the controller.

Inertial measurement unit (IMU) (Figure 1.19 C): This sensor can detect the
orientation of a robot, using gravity, magnetic, and rotational forces

Solid-state LiDAR (Figure 1.19 D): This sensor (an LD-07) uses an infrared laser array
to sense the distance of many points over a 90-degree range. These produce lists of
distance points. The LD-07 is hard to get hold of, with most LiDAR (Light Detection
and Ranging) sensors being large and expensive.
idx_966ba779
5.
Raspberry Pi Camera Module (Figure 1.19 E): This module lets a Raspberry Pi capture
pictures and video sequences. We'll use it for visual processing in Chapter 14, Robot
Vision – Using a Pi Camera and OpenCV. It can generate a lot of data quickly, which is
one of the problems associated with robot vision. It is sensitive to lighting conditions.
idx_75579601
There are many more sensors, including ones to detect positions of limbs, light, smoke, heat
sources, and magnetic fields. These can be used to make more advanced robots and add mor

## Summary

## References