# qubit-note: Actuators 101

## Overview

Actuators allow a robot to manipulate the world that surrounds it.
In this note we will review the most commonly used actuators that are used in robotics.


## Actuators

Actuators are the parts of a robot that act on the world. Actuator power can be modulated with
signals to control movement. Our primary actuators are motors – output devices that rotate
when power is applied. Other examples of actuators are solenoids, valves, and pneumatic
rams.

Linear actuators, like those shown in Figure 1.16, are devices that convert electrical signals into
motion along a single axis. These can be a stepper motor driving a screw in a fixed enclosure, or
use arrays of coils and magnets:

A solenoid is a simple linear actuator using an electromagnetic coil with a metal core that is
pulled or pushed away when powered. A common use of this type is in hydraulic or pneumatic
valves. Hydraulic and pneumatic systems generate powerful motions like those seen in
excavators. A smaller solenoid-based actuator is used in a doorbell, pulled to hit one tuneful
bar and released to hit another.
idx_5be726c3
idx_6388415d
Another type is rotary actuators. The output of these rotates, with speed or power depending
on the input power. While there are hydraulic and pneumatic types, the most common are
electronic motors. Since we will be using those in our robots, let's take a closer look at them.

Types of motors
There are a number of different kinds of motors that robots commonly use. Let's take a look at
what each one of them does and how we might use them for different types of motion:

To identify what each of these motors does, let's look at them in detail:
•
DC motor – Figure 1.17 (A): This is the simplest motor in robotics and is the basis of
gear motors. It uses direct current (DC), which means it can be driven by a continuous
voltage, with the direction and speed controlled by the direction and magnitude of that
voltage. The motor speed is proportional to the voltage versus the torque required to
move. A motor like this can spin too fast to be useful. It will not have much torque and
stall easily

DC gear motor – Figure 1.17 (B): This is a DC motor fitted with a gearbox. This gearbox
provides a speed reduction and increases the torque it can handle. This mechanical
advantage increases the motor's ability to move a load. We will use gear motors such as

Servo motor (or servomechanism) – Figure 1.17 (C): This type of motor combines a
gear motor with a position sensor and a built-in controller

The motor is coupled through a gearbox to the sensor in a feedback loop. The controller
compares the intended position with the actual position feedback, outputting the
power needed for the motor to reach the intended position. Servo motors are used in
pan and tilt mechanisms, robot arms, and limbs. We will connect and program servo
motors in Chapter 10, Using Python to Control Servo Motors. Some servo motors provide
feedback as an analog signal from the position sensor. There are also smart servo
motors that use a data signal, over which they can provide more feedback to a
control


Stepper motor – Figure 1.17 (D): This has coils powered in a sequence to let the motor
step a certain number of degrees. Where exact motions are needed, engineers use
steppers. Stepper motors tend to be slower and generate a lot of heat compared with

DC motors or servo motors. They are used in fine-control applications, such as 3D
printers and high-end robot arms. They are heavier and more expensive than other
motors.
•
Brushless motor: This can be more precisely controlled than a DC motor, operating
like a fast stepper motor. They can be capable of ranges of very low to very high speeds
and high torque, but require electronic speed controllers (ESCs). They run quieter and
are popular in drones and hoverboards. They may require a gearbox to reduce speed,
depending on the motor's magnet arrangement.


## Summary

## References