# qubit-note: CPU vs GPU

## Overview

In this note, we want to compare a CPU and a GPU. This will shed more light as to what we can achieve with a GPU and how to best use it.
In addition, we will discuss some of the benefits that GPUs offer.


## CPU vs GPU

Now that we know a little more about how GPUs are organized, we can compare them with CPUs
to understand the impact of using these devices.
Modern CPUs are typically composed of many cores, so they’re capable of executing parallel
applications by using threads. But while they’re capable of handling tens of threads, a single GPU
can handle thousands of threads.

Modern CPUs are typically composed of many cores, so they’re capable of executing parallel
applications by using threads. But while they’re capable of handling tens of threads, a single GPU
can handle thousands of threads.

As mentioned previously, the fact that GPU cores execute the same instruction on many pieces of
data simultaneously is an interesting difference from CPU cores. On a CPU, each core is a complete
processor that can execute either different applications or different threads of the same parallel
application. This means that branch execution on a CPU core doesn’t affect the performance of
other CPU core executions.
Another important distinction is that CPUs can switch between tasks quickly, while GPU cores
are controlled by their streaming multiprocessor.
Regarding memory management, most of the time we don’t need to change the way we access
our variables. Although this may affect program performance, the impact is proportionally much
smaller than it is in the case of GPUs.

### Advantages and challenges of GPU programming
So far, we’ve learned why parallelism matters, considered the various GPU device components, and
compared GPUs with CPUs. Now it’s time to understand how GPUs can enhance the performance
of our solutions and how to overcome the challenges that come with these benefits.
Since we’ve already talked about some of the benefits, let’s start with the challenges that come
with GPU programming.

#### GPU challenges
The most obvious challenge is that we can’t change the device’s components, so we can’t upgrade
its memory, for example. Hardware limitations will directly restrict what we can do and how we’ll
need to break down our data for processing.
We also talked about memory transfers, something that can easily become an overhead if we have
to move data to and from the device constantly. Typically, we try to move data to the device and
compute as much as possible before having to move more data.
Another challenge is that some types of computation aren’t fit to be executed within the GPU,
such as code that has too many branches or that isn’t parallelizable (remember driving to the
supermarket?). We may choose to execute sequential code on the device if that’s an alternative
to moving data away from the device’s memory. Moreover, memory management considerations
are a constant factor during development, because the wrong memory access pattern can have a
performance penalty that nullifies the benefits of using a GPU in the first place.

These limitations make it obvious that developing for GPU devices is more complex than writing
traditional sequential software for CPUs, and developers must invest some time to learn what’s
necessary.

#### GPU advantages

Although there are challenges with developing GPU software, the benefits far outweigh them.
The most immediate benefit is their massive parallelism; even with the simplest GPUs, we gain
access to hundreds of processing cores. If we can model our solution to a linear algebraic method,
that’s even better as it will allow us to achieve high throughput in our processing, especially if
we pay due regard to memory transfers.
Also, there are many specialized libraries today that make it easier to develop applications – most
numerical methods necessary for mathematical modeling are already available in thoroughly
tested libraries, for example. If it’s possible to use one of those libraries, it will not only accelerate
the development time but also increase its quality.
Additionally, the direct effect of high data throughput using GPUs is better use of energy – another
benefit of performing many operations simultaneously.

## Summary

## References