# qubit-note: Part 5 | TLS 101

## Overview

The previous section, <a href="2026-03-17-part-4-TCP_101.md">qubit-note:  Part 4 | TCP 101</a>, discussed the TCP protocol
and how it offers reliability and stability to a inter-process communication. However, TCP is not very secure. In this section
we will discuss the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security">Transport Layer Security</a> or TLS.
In a nutshell TLS runs on top of TCP and provides encryption, authentication and integrity [1].


## TLS 101

Although TCP offers relaibility and stability to ca communication, it is not very secure. In order to apply security to a communication
over TCP we can use TLS or Transport Layer Security. TLS provides:

- Encryption
- Authentication
- Integrity

Let's briefly discuss each of these. 

### Encryption

Encryption guarantees that the data transmitted between a client and a server can only bre read by the communicating
processes. The way data is encrypted is done in steps. First the two processes have to negotiateand share an encryption secret.
This is done using asymmetric encryption [1]. This can be slow but it's only used to create the shared encryption key. Aftern that
usually symmetric encryption is used which is fast and cheap. It is good practice to use TLS for all communication even those that are not
going over the public internet.

### Authentication

Authentication ensures that the client can verify who the server claims to be.
TLS implements authentication using digital signatures based on asymmetric cryptography [1].
The server generates private abd public keys and shares the publick key with the client. In order for the client
to be able to verify the public key, a certificate authority (CA) is used.


### Integrity

Although encryption ensures that the data is obfuscated, a middle man could still random bits within the messages this is called
tampering [1]. In order to protect against tampering, TLS verifies the integrity of the data by calculatig a message digest.


## Summary

## References

1. Robert Vitillo, _Understanding Distributed Systems What every developer should know about large distributed applications_
2. <a href="https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/ssl/what-is-asymmetric-encryption/">What is asymmetric encryption?</a>
