# qubit-note: Part 7 | Communication | APIs

## Overview

We have seen how to establish reliable and secure connections between distributed processes. We also saw how to discover the IP address of a server using the
Domain Name System. In this note, we will discuss how a service is exposed to the outside world or within a distributed system.
Typically, a process service will expose an API that faciliates external actors in using it. There are different styles of APIs. The most
common styles are:

- <a href="https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/rest-apis">REST</a>
- <a href="https://graphql.org/">GraphQL</a>
- <a href="https://grpc.io/">gRPC</a>

We will briefly review these in this note.

## APIs

Perhaps the most common API architecture at the time of writing is the RESTful API so let's start with this.


### RESTful API

A RESTful API is an API that conforms to the design principles of the representational state transfer (REST) architectural style.
REST was first, defined in 2000 by computer scientist Dr. Roy Fielding in his doctoral dissertation [2]. It provides developers with a relatively high level of flexibility, consistency, scalability and efficiency. REST APIs provide a lightweight way to build web APIs and are commonly used to facilitate data exchange between applications, web services and databases, and to connect components in microservices architectures. A RESTfull API is typically implemented on top of the <a href="2026-04-09-Part-8-HTTP.md">HTTP</a> protocol. A RESTful API style is suitable when we develop a system that 
is resource centered. Typically, a REST API will implmenet the various methods exposed by the HTTP protocol such as GET and POST. In addition, such an API can be developed by using any programming language. A RESTful API should nevertheless comnform to the following constriants [2]:

- Uniform interface
- Client/server decoupling
- Statelessness
- Cacheability
- Layered system architecture
- Code on demand (optional)

We won't go here over the details of what these mean but we will discuss it more thoroughly when addressing RESTful APIs specifically.
See also <a href="software_engineering/2025-08-16-some-best-practices-api-design.md">qubit-note: Architecture Series | Some Best Practices in API Design</a>.

### GraphQL

GraphQL was developed by Facebook engineers in order to address the issue of loading data that would otherwise require  different API requests from different endpoints. In other GraphQL exposes data via a single endpoint. This is in contrast to a REST API that exposes data through different endpoints. By doing so, GraphQL implicitly enables us to understand the data via a specific schema.
Doing so helps to read/write data in a structured way. Such structured ways are important for large operations and to quickly understand any data trail.
GaphQL can be useful in the following two scenarios: 

- When a client needs to gather data from mulitple sources
- When a number of client applications share one data source, but have different views of the data. GraphQL allows the applications to access the shared data where they can use it in a way that makes sense. Via GraphQL, applications can ask for the specific fields they want to present to the user instead of requesting all the fields.

GraphQL can offere several advantages over REST however it is not the right option for server-to-server communication. In addition, it can be more CPU intensive to run on the server side compared to a REST API.


### gRPC


The gRPC API framework combines all the performance improvement and capabilities of HTTP/2 as a single package. It can be utilized in several cases that require high throughput backends to communicate with limited CPU and memory devices. In connection with this, gRPC is a framework with built-in features required to run a system and efficient serialization and deserialization capabilities.
gRPC can  be very useful if we have to design a low-latency, highly scalable distributed system. It is also a better choice if we aim to build a back-end system including an enormous number of interconnected microservices. In such a case, gRPC can provide efficiency and speed. It will also offer built-in features, such as deadline propagation, cascading cancellation, retries, request hedging, etc.

Note however that the gRPC framework supports only a handful of languages hence you can't use it if our language isn’t in the supported language list. Another important downside is that even if our language is supported, the consumer might want to use another language that is not on the list. Then we’ll need to opt for another choice or look for more workarounds. 


## Summary

This note explains how services in distributed systems expose functionality through APIs, focusing on three common styles: REST, GraphQL, and gRPC. RESTful APIs, based on Roy Fielding’s REST principles, are the most widely used and rely on HTTP methods like GET and POST to provide flexible, scalable, and resource-oriented communication while adhering to constraints such as statelessness and a uniform interface. GraphQL, developed by Facebook, improves data fetching by allowing clients to query specific data from a single endpoint using a defined schema, making it ideal for aggregating data from multiple sources or serving diverse client needs, though it can be more resource-intensive and less suited for server-to-server communication. gRPC, built on HTTP/2, emphasizes high performance and efficiency, making it well-suited for low-latency, highly scalable microservices architectures, but its limited language support and interoperability constraints can restrict its adoption.


## References

1. Robert Vitillo, _Understanding Distributed Systems What every developer should know about large distributed applications_
2.  <a href="https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/rest-apis">REST</a>  
3. <a href="https://graphql.org/">GraphQL</a>
4. <a href="https://grpc.io/">gRPC</a>
